---
title: 'MisOS Lab02'
date: 2023-03-07
permalink: /posts/2023/03/mitoslab02/
tags:
  - labs
  - solutions
excerpt: ""
---

代码参考链接：[https://github.com/ChenYuHengSJTU/MIT_OSLab/tree/syscall](https://github.com/ChenYuHengSJTU/MIT_OSLab/tree/syscall)

## System call tracing([moderate](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2020/labs/guidance.html))

### TODO

+ In this assignment you will add a system call tracing feature that may help you when debugging later labs. You’ll create a new trace system call that will control tracing. It should take one argument, an integer “mask”, whose bits specify which system calls to trace. For example, to trace the fork system call, a program calls trace(1 << SYS_fork), where SYS_fork is a syscall number from kernel/syscall.h. You have to modify the xv6 kernel to print out a line when each system call is about to return, if the system call’s number is set in the mask. The line should contain the process id, the name of the system call and the return value; you don’t need to print the system call arguments. The trace system call should enable tracing for the process that calls it and any children that it subsequently forks, but should not affect other processes.

+ We provide a trace user-level program that runs another program with tracing enabled (see `user/trace.c`). When you’re done, you should see output like this:

```bash
$ trace 32 grep hello README
3: syscall read -> 1023
3: syscall read -> 966
3: syscall read -> 70
3: syscall read -> 0
$
$ trace 2147483647 grep hello README
4: syscall trace -> 0
4: syscall exec -> 3
4: syscall open -> 3
4: syscall read -> 1023
4: syscall read -> 966
4: syscall read -> 70
4: syscall read -> 0
4: syscall close -> 0
$
$ grep hello README
$
$ trace 2 usertests forkforkfork
usertests starting
test forkforkfork: 407: syscall fork -> 408
408: syscall fork -> 409
409: syscall fork -> 410
410: syscall fork -> 411
409: syscall fork -> 412
410: syscall fork -> 413
409: syscall fork -> 414
411: syscall fork -> 415
...
```

+ In the first example above, trace invokes grep tracing just the read system call. The 32 is 1<<SYS_read. In the second example, trace runs grep while tracing all system calls; the 2147583647 has all 31 low bits set. In the third example, the program isn’t traced, so no trace output is printed. In the fourth example, the fork system calls of all the descendants of the forkforkfork test in usertests are being traced. Your solution is correct if your program behaves as shown above (though the process IDs may be different).

### Hints

+ Add `$U/_trace` to `UPROGS` in Makefile
+ Run make qemu and you will see that the compiler cannot compile `user/trace.c`, because the user-space stubs for the system call don’t exist yet: add a prototype for the system call to user/user.h, a stub to `user/usys.pl`, and a syscall number to `kernel/syscall.h`. The Makefile invokes the perl script `user/usys.pl`, which produces user/usys.S, the actual system call stubs, which use the RISC-V ecall instruction to transition to the kernel. Once you fix the compilation issues, run trace 32 grep hello README; it will fail because you haven’t implemented the system call in the kernel yet.
+ Add a `sys_trace()` function in `kernel/sysproc.c` that implements the new system call by remembering its argument in a new variable in the proc structure (see `kernel/proc.h`). The functions to retrieve system call arguments from user space are in `kernel/syscall.c`, and you can see examples of their use in `kernel/sysproc.c`.
+ Modify fork() (see `kernel/proc.c`) to copy the trace mask from the parent to the child process.
+ Modify the `syscall()` function in `kernel/syscall.c` to print the trace output. You will need to add an array of syscall names to index into.

## Sysinfo([moderate](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2020/labs/guidance.html))

### TODO

+ In this assignment you will add a system call, `sysinfo`, that collects information about the running system. The system call takes one argument: a pointer to a `struct sysinfo` (see `kernel/sysinfo.`h). The kernel should fill out the fields of this struct: the freemem field should be set to the number of bytes of free memory, and the nproc field should be set to the number of processes whose state is not UNUSED. We provide a test program `sysinfotest`; you pass this assignment if it prints “sysinfotest: OK”.

### Hints

+ Add `$U/_sysinfotest` to `UPROGS` in Makefile

+ Run `make qemu`; `user/sysinfotest.c` will fail to compile. Add the system call sysinfo, following the same steps as in the previous assignment. To declare the prototype for `sysinfo()` in `user/user.h` you need predeclare the existence of struct sysinfo:

```c
struct sysinfo;
int sysinfo(struct sysinfo *);
```

+ Once you fix the compilation issues, run sysinfotest; it will fail because you haven’t implemented the system call in the kernel yet.

+ sysinfo needs to copy a struct sysinfo back to user space; see `sys_fstat() `(`kernel/sysfile.c`) and `filestat()` (`kernel/file.c`) for examples of how to do that using copyout().

+ To collect the amount of free memory, add a function to `kernel/kalloc.c`

+ To collect the number of processes, add a function to `kernel/proc.c`